
    1_getting_started
    1_1_lay_of_the_land
    1_2_setting_data_types
    1_3_stray_commas
    1_4_additional_columns
	
	
# 1_getting_started

QC'ing data can seem overwhelming at first. So, its important to be systematic in your approach from the outset. Assuming you have no familiarity what-so-ever with the dataset, the place to start is simply by exploring the columns and rows of data.  I will be using the terms "columns", "rows" and "dataframes" for all dataset descriptions. 

In the QC-phase of data publication, we won't typically be interpreting the data or doing a subject-area analysis. Those tasks should be done by the data analyst and project leads earlier in the workflow. Instead, we'll be focusing on the correctness of the data in the same sense that a proof-reader would focus on misspelling, format layout and appearence in the final evaluation of an article prior to its release for publication. In those instances where subject expertise is required, I'll indicate that you need to consult with a subject-area expert. In most instances, we are only looking for common anomalies caused by data handling, data loggers, database export functions and simple errors introduced during data editing.

In the examples that follow, you will need to load certain libraries for all your scripts. For R, you will need dplyr and ggplot or you can simply load the tidyverse platform which is what I will do here, and for Python, you will need pandas, matplotlib and the IPython platform. There are excellent instructions for setting up your development environment for R in the online book, https://r4ds.hadley.nz/ and for Python, https://wesmckinney.com/book/. If you plan on making a career out of data management, please consider supporting the authors by buying their books. 

As you write your scripts, be sure to include the following header code. For R, its

	library(tidyverse)

and for Python, 

	import os
	import pandas as pd
	import matplotlib.pyplot as plt


# 1_1_lay_of_the_land

Its good to get started just by looking at the data. Both R and Python provide methods for quickly viewing the dataset. 

For R, use 

	setwd("C:/Users/Growell/QC-tips-and-tricks/1_getting_started")
	getwd()
	
	df <- read_csv("Electric_Vehicle_Population.csv")
	df
	
	head(df)
	tail(df)
	
	view(df)
	
	

For Python, use
	
	os.chdir("c:\\Users\\growell\\QC-tips-and-tricks\\1_getting_started")
	print(os.getcwd())
		
	df = pd.read_csv("Electric_Vehicle_Population.csv")
	df	
		
	df.head()
	df.tail()
		
	pd.set_option('display.max_rows', None)
	pd.set_option('display.max_columns', None)
		
	print(df)
		

When working with large dataframes in the IPython console, it may be impractical to display all rows, in which case you can simply display the first and last 100 or so rows as follows

	df.head(100)
	df.tail(100)
	

    
# 1_2_setting_data_types

Following your initial inspection of the data, you will need to verify and in some instances coerce data types so they correctly represent the data. For example, the R interpreter will load numeric colmuns as double by default, while the Python interpreter will load all numerical data as integer unless it sees a decimal point in the number. In these cases, you can manually coerce the data columns to the correct data type. 

In R, we can display the data types and coerce the double columns to integer as follows

	glimpse(df)

	df <- df |>
	  mutate(Vehicle_ID = as.integer(Vehicle_ID))


In Python, you can use the dtypes method and coerce integer columns to float as follows

	print(df.dtypes)
	
	df['Electric_Range'] = df['Electric_Range'].astype(float)
	


# 1_3_stray_commas

When you load csv files, you are using commas to parse the columns of your data. Any stray commas, for example, those embedded in a comments column, will break the parsing process. Extra commas will typically create extra columns. WIth R, this can be tracked using the problems() function. In the following example, I have introduced three stray commas into the dataset. Lets see if we can find them.

In R,

	df <- read_csv("Electric_Vehicle_Population_commas.csv")
	problems(df)
	
The function problems() identifies lines 100, 200 and 300 where there are problems.
	
In Python,

    df = pd.read_csv("Electric_Vehicle_Population_commas.csv")

The read_csv() method fails and returns "Error tokenizing data" on line 100 of the data. Correcting this error, the read_csv() method finds the next error on line 200, and the method continues to throw parsing errors until the .csv file is clean. 

The offending commas can be quickly removed using a text editor such as Notepad, Notepad++ or VS Code.





# 1_4_additional_columns

More generally, Its possible for extra columns to be generated by other processes in addition to embedded commas. You may accidentally generate extra columns while exporting data from a database. Any extraneous column names or mismatch between column names and data may cause this. Similarly, additional columns may be generated while editing and modifying csv files in Excel. If the problems() function flags anything following the read_csv() step, extra columns and misaligned column names are often the cause. Its good to look over all your data once its migrated to csv format. 













